Konami made a real statement of intent with PES 2014, introducing a new game engine which not only transforms the action on the pitch for the better, but also sets up a mighty battle between itself and FIFA heading into the next generation.

With its footballing franchise dominating in recent years, the need to reinvent FIFA 14 is less of an issue for EA Sports, who have instead opted to tweak and refine the action on the pitch and options away from it.

The result is a release that doesn't give the beautiful game a complete makeover, but still manages to make it a slightly more attractive option for football fans.

FIFA 14's most significant changes affect the way matches are paced, removing the reliance on speedier players in favour of a much more balanced style, where strength and positional awareness is key.

Not only is the game slower than before, but there are new ways to protect the ball in midfield, players have more control when it comes to taking a first touch, and there's even a new motion engine, which gives players more freedom to dribble in different directions.

    The game appears to be less bug-ridden, and the physics engine is more refined with players less likely to fall over each other.

Artificial intelligence is also significantly improved, particularly in attack, with supporting players drawing defenders away by making smarter runs without the ball or playing off the shoulder of a high defensive line.

There are probably a few more errant offside decisions than before, but you'll really appreciate the AI when a quick counter-attack pays off.

Small though they may appear on paper, these additional touches combine to create a deeper and more realistic football experience.

For example, after hoofing the ball from defence, my midfielder was able to hold off the defender as an attacker ran past the halfway line and into space on the right-hand side.

Playing a diagonal ball, I was able to direct my first touch towards the goal ahead the defender, using strength to hold him off.

Another attacker drew the only other defender away from goal with a cross field run, giving me a clear path to goal.

It's just one example of the different gameplay mechanics combining to create that perfect counter attacking goal.

Another seemingly minor enhancement is the new Pure Shot technique, which gives more gifted attackers the opportunity to strike a decent shot, even when they're off-balance.


It's something I noticed in my first game, as my player tumbled over but still managed to hit an accurate, albeit not particularly powerful shot, across the face off goal.

Judging by the number of instant replays it produced, Pure Shot is something EA is proud of too.

Elsewhere, visuals are cleaner, smoother and more colourful than before. In addition, the game appears to be less bug-ridden, and the physics engine is more refined with players less likely to fall over each other.

Off the pitch is a similar story, with lots of minor improvements that contribute to a deeper and more satisfying footballing experience.

FIFA 14's career mode, for example, benefits from lots of presentational improvements, such as the Windows 8-esque menus, which are crystal clear and easy to follow.

FIFA 14's presentation is superb


The commentary, meanwhile, is superb. Not only do players benefit from detailed colour commentary, but there are consistent updates from other matches, random facts about clubs, and references to past results and debuts.

Away fans will even boo players who have left the club for greener pastures, which, when combined with potentially heated press conference statements, adds a little flavour to the bigger matches.

Outside of the match day atmosphere, we were particularly impressed with new scouting system, which adds a whole new layer to transfers.

    The career modes are incredibly deep, giving players so much to think about, especially compared to PES 2014's stripped down Master League mode.

Players must send scouts to different countries, giving them a list of attributes to look for.

When reports come back, scouts can be assigned to individual players, uncovering detailed stats, the amount of money you should offer and how they'll fit into your system.

The other option is to make a blind bid - which you'll have to do during tense transfer deadline days - but you won't have any idea about a player's worth or their overall attributes, which makes it much riskier.

FIFA 14: Ultimate Team screenshot

© EA

Ultimate Team adds new chemistry styles


The career modes are incredibly deep, giving players so much to think about, especially compared to PES 2014's stripped down Master League mode.

Finally, while we were unable to fully get to grips with FIFA Ultimate Team, EA Canada has added a new single-player mode as well as new chemistry styles, which should allow players to better mould a team in their likeness.

FIFA 14 is far from a revolutionary release, and it's arguably inferior to the much improved PES 2014 in terms of pure footballing gameplay.

That said, FIFA 14 is the most complete virtual footballing experience available today. Whether in single or multiplayer, there's enough to keep fans busy well into the new football season and beyond.

Read more: http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/gaming/review/a517446/fifa-14-review-ps3-the-most-complete-football-game-yet.html#~oVvNqU2cUE23HG#ixzz3IxvoySXg
Follow us: @digitalspy on Twitter | digitalspyuk on Facebook
