FIFA 14 on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One proudly boasts an entirely new engine, and though it may have been built from the ground up it’s still very much within touching distance of its current-gen sibling. The key differences are largely superficial, and while that sounds like criticism, it isn’t when the foundation is so good.That means it’s still a brilliant game, crammed with all the modes and features you’d expect from FIFA (that hasn’t always been the case with launch versions of FIFA). Occasionally some of the differences affect the way it plays, suggesting at where the series may go in the future, but for the most part they simply make FIFA 14 into a more polished and pleasurable version of the same experience.


Thankfully FIFA preserves the unparalleled variety of the current-gen iteration. This is not to be sniffed at, since this hasn’t always been the case – the Wii U launch version of FIFA 13 was a severely gutted version. But this is FIFA, as you know it – from one-off fixtures to ongoing seasons, online friendlies, a selection of that week’s matches, a career mode, and skill games. And of course the revamped Ultimate Team, one of FIFA’s most popular modes. It’s all present and correct. And if you’ve already started the season on current-gen, progress in modes like Ultimate Team is transferable. For a sports title, FIFA still can’t be beaten for its sheer variety.

The most notable difference is perhaps unsurprisingly the way it looks. Graphically it’s much sharper, smoother, and more detailed, with everything from player likenesses to the texture of the pitch benefitting. Up close, players still look a little dead behind the eyes and move awkwardly when shaking hands or getting substituted. But there are still loads of little details that impress, like the way fabric ripples as a player moves or two balls being on the pitch at once thanks to an over-eager ball-boy trying to restart the match. Taken individually they’re minor improvements, but have a really great cumulative effect. 

The best aspect of next-gen FIFA 14 is undoubtedly the extended range and depth of player animation. Current versions of FIFA use a limited stock of core animations to represent a wide range of different actions. There was no unique through-ball animation, for instance, with the game using the animation for a more generic pass. But next-gen FIFA 14 makes no such compromise. There’s so much variety, and though it doesn’t directly impact how you play, it makes what you do look so much more realistic and visually appealing. Now when you  hit a cross-field pass, the player will open up their body and really dig under the ball. It feels like you're making that type of pass. And this extends to most actions on the pitch, whether that's playing a cheeky through-ball with the outside of the boot or dinking a low pass out wide. While watching back a goal I scored in slow motion, I spotted the player gently rolling his foot over the ball, taking it away from the defender. This wasn't down to anything I did – it's all automated, a product of context – but it made the match feel much less mechanical and more attractive to play and watch.

Changes to gameplay aren’t as extensive as I was anticipating, though there are a couple of areas in which this version does feel slightly different. When defending on the 360 and PS3, I normally apply lots of pressure onto the opposing team and use the slide tackle to win back the ball. It's crude and heavy-handed, but it works a lot of the time. In the Xbox One and PS4 version this is a much less viable tactic, since players have more self-awareness. So when you go in for a sliding challenge, it's highly likely the player in possession will hurdle the incoming tackle. It’s far more authentic, and makes defending much more about maintaining your shape, closing down play, and tracking runs – all of which is aided greatly by the players’ improved positional awareness and decision making. It does a better job of approximating the real-life sport, yet importantly doesn’t make it any less fun. Those heightened player reactions again also enhance the look of matches in other ways; for instance, sometimes when I shot on goal, if there was a player in the way, they’d do their best to duck out of the way of the incoming strike. Again, it subtly but potently adds to the realism. 

Another noteworthy change is the ball feels much more like an independent entity than ever before. During matches there are now instances in which the ball breaks free – after a rebound or misplaced pass – and both teams have to chase it down, rather than possession simply alternating between the two. It’s not revolutionary but I definitely haven’t encountered that openness in FIFA before. It creates a much more lively, physical experience, with more tussling and physical matchups. It produces a more realistic representation of the sport, and I found it a more enjoyable, unpredictable, and a slightly more competitive experience.

That sense of life is strengthened by the improved stadiums and crowds. Spectators are now a fully three-dimensional, reactive presence – the home and away fans respond differently depending on the ebb and flow of the game. It’s not incredibly varied – you can still spot the same faces and shirts – but it’s a massive, long-awaited improvement. Stadiums are touch more detailed, too, with some well-known grounds even having exteriors, but this is mostly limited to the pre-match credits. It’s a really nice presentational flourish, though doesn't dramatically improve the experience.

FIFA 14 isn’t a leap into the future of the series; it has a lot in common with the version of FIFA 14 that's already out. There are real flashes of potential, though, and hints at where it may go in the future – the sheer variety of animation, cognisant players, more palpable atmosphere – but what FIFA 14 on next-gen consoles does right now is add an impressive visual layer to an already brilliant sports game.