I bought this game around October of 2005 and had a blast playing it, until I reached level 60.

The only way to progress with your character once you hit 60 is to participate in end-game content raiding guild, 19-39 other players per raid.

You will find yourself a lot in Molten Core, Black Wing Layer and AQ. If you love waiting a few hours a few nights a week for enough people in your guild to show up and have the patience for repeated wipes on bosses, then you won't mind this game a bit.

I have had 2 level 60's, a Hunter (my first) and Druid. I also had multiple mid-level toons.

With my guild I've seen it all but Onyxia before I quit and got rid of my account.

My suggestion to you is, do not buy the 6 month subscription but try the 3 month option to see if you really like it.

I had a huge problem with it, as I would constantly play and stay up to the early morning hours (everyday). I logged more hours per week than what you would do at a full time job, while I was going to college classes and doing a part time job - lets just say my life for 6 months outside of WoW was horrible and suffered because my addiction.

Quitting was the best thing for me, lol.

But back to the review, I suggest you TAKE YOUR TIME AND ENJOY playing this game, don't rush to 60, as once you're there the only way to progress your toon is to do raids that take hours to complete (if you're lucky enough to do, and lucky enough to have enough DKP for the item to roll on). So enjoy the experience.

I hit level 60 on my first toon in three weeks, I just blazed through everything, big mistake. Do all the quests and enjoy it.

Otherwise this is a great game that has huge queue problems on many servers, bugs since beta still persist and online support/phone support is horrible!

I give it a 5 for value due to the fact they keep adding more features but don't fix the existing ones, like when they added weather atmospheric effects they still hadn't fixed class specific skill text errors on improved skill buffs (been around since BETA, over a year of bugs still there).